IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 11, NO. 24, 15 DECEMBER 2024

40331

Joint Computation Offloading and Service Caching
in Mobile Edge–Cloud Computing via Deep
Reinforcement Learning
Ce Shang , Youliang Huang, Yan Sun , and Mohsen Guizani , Fellow, IEEE

Abstract—Mobile edge computing (MEC) emerges as a promising paradigm that aims to extend the computing capabilities
of mobile devices. This enhancement is achieved by offloading
heavy computational tasks to nearby edge servers, where relevant
services, such as programs, databases, and libraries, are stored to
support the execution of these tasks. Given the restricted storage
capacity and computing resources of edge servers, it is crucial to
carefully consider which tasks to offload and which services to
cache. However, the highly dynamic system and closely coupled
decisions between offloading and caching pose considerable
challenges to developing an effective strategy. In this article, we
investigate both computation offloading and service caching in an
end–edge–cloud collaborative system under time-varying wireless
channels and task requests. We formulate an optimization
problem aimed at minimizing the system cost, including time and
energy consumption, and model it further as a Markov decision
process (MDP). To address this, we propose a deep reinforcement
learning (DRL)-based approach with dynamic action masking
to concurrently optimize offloading and caching decisions. This
approach renormalizes the valid action probability distribution
at every step, enabling the agent to explore within the space of
valid action combinations and thereby learn the optimal policy.
Extensive experimental results demonstrate that the proposed
approach greatly reduces the system cost compared to other
representative benchmark schemes.
Index Terms—Computation offloading, deep reinforcement
learning (DRL), end–edge–cloud, invalid action mask, service
caching.

I. I NTRODUCTION
ITH the advance of fifth-generation (5G) mobile technology and the Internet of Things (IoT), a range
of heavy computing applications, such as interactive online
gaming, image processing, and virtual reality, are emerging
on mobile devices [1]. Mobile edge computing (MEC) has
been identified as a promising paradigm to alleviate the
computational burden on resource-constrained mobile devices

W

Manuscript received 11 August 2024; accepted 24 August 2024. Date
of publication 30 August 2024; date of current version 6 December 2024.
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of
China under Grant 62272052 and Grant 62172051. (Corresponding authors:
Yan Sun; Mohsen Guizani.)
Ce Shang, Youliang Huang, and Yan Sun are with the
Department of Computer Science, Beijing University of Posts and
Telecommunications, Beijing 100876, China (e-mail: shangce@bupt.edu.cn;
butterbright0504@bupt.edu.cn; sunyan@bupt.edu.cn).
Mohsen Guizani is with the Machine Learning Department, Mohamed
Bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence, Abu Dhabi, UAE (e-mail:
mguizani@ieee.org).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JIOT.2024.3452117

by deploying computing and storage resources at the network
edge, enabling task offloading to nearby edge servers [2].
However, indiscriminately offloading all tasks is inadvisable
due to the limited processing power of edge servers and the
time and energy costs associated with data transfer. Therefore,
it is critical to develop an efficient strategy that carefully
balances tasks and environmental factors to effectively utilize
computing resources.
Recently, many offloading schemes have been
proposed [3], [4], [5]. However, the implicit assumption in
these studies is that edge servers are capable of performing
all types of tasks, disregarding the heterogeneity of mobile
applications. In reality, performing the task for a particular
application on the MEC server requires not just the necessary
input data but also the associated service components, such
as application programs, databases, and libraries [6]. Due to
limited storage capacity, caching all categories of services
on edge servers is impractical. Thus, the types of services
cached on MEC servers determine whether a task can be
offloaded for execution, which directly affects the computing
efficiency of the system. Several studies have proposed joint
schemes for computation offloading and service caching [7],
[8], [9], [10], [11], [12], [13], [14]. Nevertheless, the most
classical optimization methods often need many iterations to
attain an acceptable solution, making them costly to employ
in fast-varying environments. Concurrently, the resurgence of
artificial intelligence (AI) has propelled the advancement of
data-driven deep reinforcement learning (DRL), which is now
considered an effective solution for making online decisions
in time-varying edge environments [15]. Utilizing deep neural
networks (DNNs), it learns the optimal mapping of states
to actions through direct interaction with the environment,
without requiring statistical information about the MEC
system.
Nevertheless, formulating an effective online strategy for
joint computation offloading and service caching is nontrivial
due to the following challenges. First, computation offloading and service caching are tightly coupled subproblems.
Their interaction jointly affects the response time and energy
consumption of system tasks, necessitating the simultaneous optimization of both to fully utilize limited computing
and storage resources. Second, the DRL agent may explore
numerous invalid actions in its joint decision-making during
the training phase, such as offloading a task to an edge
server, that does not cache the related service, rendering the

c 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
2327-4662 
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Queen's University. Downloaded on October 19,2025 at 01:37:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

40332

IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 11, NO. 24, 15 DECEMBER 2024

offloaded task infeasible. Imposing a significant penalty term
on the reward function is a commonly employed method to
discourage invalid actions. However, this approach tends to
cause the agent to become overly conservative due to frequent
large penalties, easily resulting in getting stuck in local optima,
and the entire exploration process can be lengthy, leading to
low-learning efficiency. Third, the overhead of transmitting
computation results, particularly for emerging data-intensive
applications with large output results, such as image processing and neural machine translation, should also be considered
in the modeling and optimization process, further complicating
the problem.
In this article, we explore the joint optimization of computation offloading and service caching in an end–edge–cloud
orchestrated system. The types and characteristics of requested
tasks, such as input and output data sizes and computational
workload, as well as the wireless channel conditions, are
time-varying. The edge server selectively caches services, and
tasks are strategically executed either locally, on the edge
server, or in the cloud. Moreover, the complete overhead of
mobile devices is considered in the system model, including
the phases of task upload, computation waiting, and result
download. We formulate an optimization problem to minimize the system costs and model it as a Markov decision
process (MDP). Motivated by the potential of DRL for online
decision-making in dynamic systems, we propose a proximal
policy optimization (PPO) [16]-based approach with dynamic
masking to jointly optimize service caching and computation
offloading decisions. To be specific, we reorganize the action
space by action composition and design a dynamic masking
mechanism that renormalizes the probability distribution of
valid offloading actions based on the mask vector derived from
the environment and caching decisions. The agent samples
from the sets of valid combination actions, thereby learning the
optimal policy. By comparing multiple baseline schemes with
our approach in different system scenarios, we demonstrate its
effectiveness. Below, we summarize the key contributions of
this work.
1) Problem Formulation: We formulate a joint optimization
problem for computation offloading and service caching
within a three-tier dynamic MEC system. Services are
strategically cached on the edge server, and tasks are
appropriately executed either locally, on the edge server,
or in the cloud. The objective is to minimize the
weighted sum of time and energy consumption. In
the task offloading process, we consider the overhead
associated with the uploading, waiting, and downloading
phases.
2) DRL-Based Approach With Dynamic Masking: We
model the formulated optimization problem as an MDP
and propose a DRL-based approach to address it. The
approach renormalizes the probability distribution of
valid actions at each time slot, replacing the penalty
imposed on invalid actions. This reduces the design
complexity and enables the agent to effectively explore
the combination of caching and offloading decisions,
thereby learning the optimal policy.

3) Performance Evaluation: We conduct simulation experiments to assess the performance of the proposed
approach. Specifically, we evaluate the effectiveness of
the dynamic invalid action masking mechanism and
compare the convergence of our proposed approach with
other baseline schemes. Furthermore, we evaluate the
performance of our proposed approach against other
baseline schemes under various scenarios to demonstrate
its superiority.
The composition of this article is delineated as follows.
Relevant studies are summarized in Section II. Section III covers the system model and the formulated optimization problem.
Section IV presents the proposed DRL-based approach.
Simulation experiments are described in Section V. We conclude with a summary of this entire article and a preliminary
discussion of future research.
II. R ELATED W ORK
Computation offloading is a central issue in the field of
MEC that is attracting great interest in the research community.
The optimization objective of the majority of works is directed
at minimizing latency, energy consumption, or the sum of
the weights of both [3], [4], [5]. Feng et al. [3] considered
that the task can be partitioned into numerous independent
or interrelated subtasks in MEC scenarios with multiple
overlapping base stations. They simultaneously optimized task
division and device assignment to reduce the average delay per
user. Shang et al. [4] considered task computation offloading
in the context of multiserver vehicular networking, taking into
account channel variations due to fast vehicle movement and
possible outage performance and targeting the reduction of
energy usage. Tuong et al. [5] considered uploading tasks
via power multiplexing techniques in channel-constrained
MEC scenarios, where the joint optimization computation
and channel allocation attempts to reduce the computational
overhead. These studies are based on the implicit premise that
the MEC servers cache all the services and are thus able to
perform all types of tasks, which is unrealistic for resourceconstrained edge servers.
In reality, the execution of a specific task requires the
support of service components relevant to the task, including
libraries, executable programs, and input data from the mobile
device [6]. Currently, some studies have jointly explored the
integrated optimization problem that combines computation
offloading with service caching [8], [9], [10], [11], [12],
[13], [14]. Dai et al. [8] jointly considered service caching and
task offloading within the cloud-enabled two-tier fog computing framework in enterprise management systems. The authors
adopted a noncooperative game method to address the offload
problem, and a 0-1 knapsack algorithm to address the caching
problem. Liu et al. [9] investigated a joint request scheduling
and service placement problem in the urban area scenario
with multiple servers across regions. The goal is to decrease
the mean response time while maintaining the balance of
server loads, and a heuristic-based algorithm was designed.
Xiao et al. [10] examined the offloading and caching under the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Queen's University. Downloaded on October 19,2025 at 01:37:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

SHANG et al.: JOINT COMPUTATION OFFLOADING AND SERVICE CACHING IN MOBILE EDGE–CLOUD COMPUTING

device-to-device (D2D)-supported MEC model, where tasks
are allowed to be offloaded to appropriate other mobile devices
in addition to the regular offloading to remote cloud and edge
servers. The authors defined the multiobjective optimization
problem as the simultaneous reduction of latency and energy
consumption. They proposed a solution approach that combines the binary particle swarm optimization method and the
multiobjective bat algorithm. Fan et al. [11] explored the joint
decisions of channel allocation, computation offloading, and
service caching under MEC networks supported by WiFi,
where users can offload tasks to the edge node or the cloud
through WiFi to relieve the communication load on cellular
networks. Zhou et al. [12] studied the joint optimization of
computation offloading and service caching in smart grids,
where task execution relies on sensor data and data provided by surrounding infrastructure. A gradient descent-based
algorithm and a game theory-based algorithm were proposed
to address the problem. Yan et al. [13] introduced a twopart game scheme with imperfect information that optimizes
decision offloading, service caching, and MEC server pricing.
First, the base station determines which services to cache and
sets the prices for these services in order to maximize the
benefits. Subsequently, after the users have been informed of
the prices, they make their own offloading decisions in order
to lower the price and the latency of the task. Chen et al. [14]
assumed that the edge servers have unlimited storage space
and took into account the cost of placing the service. A scheme
based on local search was proposed for service placement and
user assignment to reduce the overall cost. The mentioned
approaches require multiple iterations to achieve satisfactory
solutions, and frequently resolving the optimization problem
in the highly dynamic MEC environment is not suitable.
As AI technology advances, DRL has surfaced as a
promising method for online decision-making in dynamic
environments. For example, Zhou et al. [17] proposed a double
deep Q network (DDQN)-based method for jointly optimizing
computation offloading and service caching decisions, and
experiments showed that its performance is very close to the
exhaustive search method. Zhou et al. [18] studied the edge
caching optimization problem under the hierarchical architecture of Internet of Vehicles (IoV) and proposed a distributed
multiagent DRL method. Sun et al. [19] proposed a novel
hierarchical DRL approach to jointly optimize computation
offloading and service caching decisions in an edge–cloud
network architecture. The researchers in [20] considered an
MEC scenario for end–edge–cloud collaboration with service caching, where the ranges of base stations in multiple
regions may overlap and the task can be partitioned into two
components to be performed separately. A scheme using the
DDQN was proposed to jointly determine resource allocation,
service caching, and task offloading ratios. Researchers in [21]
combine the service caching with the vehicular edge network,
where the vehicles and edge nodes only cache limited services
and the cooperation between base stations is considered.
The deep deterministic policy gradient algorithm (DDPG)
was employed to determine the service caching of base
stations and task offloading ratio. Zhou et al. [22] jointly
considered offloading, caching, and resource allocation from
the perspective of a cloud service center, aiming to minimize

40333

Fig. 1. Architecture of the end–edge–cloud orchestrated system with service
caching.

the long-term cost while meeting user latency constraints.
They developed an approach based on asynchronous advantage
actor-critic (A3C), and simulation results demonstrated its
superiority. Zhang et al. [23] examined an integrated scenario
combining service caching and compute offloading across
multiple time scales, where service caching occurred in larger
time slices and user offloading occurred in smaller time slices.
An approach based on hierarchical DRL has been presented
to decrease the time and energy consumed by the system.
Zhou et al. [24] introduced a DDPG-based scheme for making
decisions about offloading, caching, and MEC server computing resource allocation, striving to decrease long-term energy
usage. However, most of the aforementioned works assume
that tasks within the same service are homogeneous and that
the size of the task computation results is significantly smaller
than the size of the task input data, which may not be suitable
for emerging data-intensive applications with large output
results. Crucially, the aforementioned DRL-based approaches
often suppress invalid actions by imposing large penalties on
the reward function. This soft constraint may not completely
avoid invalid actions, particularly in complex action spaces,
is prone to low-solving efficiency and entrapment in local
optima. In this article, we consider more realistic dynamic
request tasks and take into account the full computation
overhead of mobile devices. Furthermore, we propose a DRLbased approach with invalid action masking to more efficiently
determine service caching and computation offloading jointly.
III. S YSTEM M ODEL AND P ROBLEM F ORMULATION
This section initially describes the system model under
study, followed by an introduction to the service caching
model. Next, the time and energy usage of different computing
models are detailed. Finally, the optimization problem for minimizing the system cost is formulated. To improve readability,
key notations are compiled in Table I.
A. System Model
Fig. 1 presents our considered system model, consisting
of a remote cloud, a base station integrated with the MEC
server, and several mobile devices distributed randomly. The

Authorized licensed use limited to: Queen's University. Downloaded on October 19,2025 at 01:37:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

40334

IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 11, NO. 24, 15 DECEMBER 2024

TABLE I
S UMMARY OF K EY N OTATIONS A DOPTED

impossible to partition, which is widely used as a typical
offloading model in existing research [25]. The mobile devices
are considered to preinstall the services necessary to complete
the requested task [6], [13]. Thus, each task has three types
of computing modes: 1) to perform locally 2) to offload to the
edge for processing when the MEC server caches the relevant
service 3) to offload to the cloud server for execution through
the base station. Next, we present the cache model and analyze
the latency and energy consumption for various computational
models.
B. Service Caching Model

MEC server links to the remote cloud server through the core
network. We denote the set of mobile devices in the system
as M = {1, 2, . . . , M}, where M represents the aggregate
number of devices. To facilitate modeling the dynamics of the
system, the timeframe of the system’s operation is segmented
into discrete, equal-length time slots, specified as T =
{1, 2, . . . , T}, with T being the total number of these slots.
In each slot, each mobile device generates a specific task.
Performing these tasks requires not only input data from
the devices themselves but also the corresponding service
components, such as executable programs, databases, and
libraries [6]. Similar to [20] and [22], we assume that the
cloud server is capable of caching all types of service data,
whereas the MEC server caches a limited number of services
due to storage space constraints.
We assume that the studied system contains a total of K
types of services, with K = {1, 2, . . . , K} representing the set
of all services. The task generated by the mobile device m for
service type k at time slot t can be depicted by a tuple of four
arguments (im (t), ϕm (t), τm (t), om (t)). Here, im (t) denotes the
input data size of the task; ϕm (t) represents the number of CPU
cycles required for task computing; τm (t) = k ∈ K indicates
the type of the request task; and om (t) indicates the output
data size. Note that we assume tasks under the same service
can have different characteristics, including variations in input
and output data size, and computational workload. Taking
image processing services as an example, the computational
requirements may differ due to the varying dimensions and
resolutions of uploaded images. This flexibility in task requests
is more practical, and also places higher demands on the
effective utilization of computing and storage resources. This
work adopts the binary offloading policy, i.e., the task is

In general, the MEC network incorporates two types of
caching strategies: 1) content caching [26] and 2) service
caching [6]. The former means storing the uploaded input
data or computational results on the edge servers. In practice,
the heterogeneous nature of tasks initiated by mobile devices
makes the reuse of this cached data difficult. Service caching
refers to caching the service components that support performing tasks on the edge servers, which can be reused by other
tasks requesting similar services. The decision to cache the
service k at time slot t is represented by a binary variable
ck (t), where ck (t) = 1 indicates that the service is cached, and
ck (t) = 0 denotes it is not. It is worth noting that the amount
of storage occupied by all cached services should not exceed
the available storage capacity of the MEC server. Suppose the
storage space of service k ∈ K is uk and the available storage
capacity of the MEC server is U. The following constraint is
satisfied:
K


ck (t)uk ≤ U.

(1)

k=1

We adopt C(t) = {c1 (t), c2 (t), . . . , cK (t)} as the representation
of the aggregate service caching decisions at time slot t. In
the system, the downloading of services from the cloud and
the uploading of tasks to the MEC server occur concurrently.
As considered in [8], we assume that the download latency
is no more than the upload latency in the system due to the
high-speed wired links between the MEC server and the cloud.
Therefore, dynamic service caching on the MEC server does
not introduce extra latency in the optimization problem.
C. Task Computing Model
We describe the offloading decision for the mobile device
l (t), d e (t), d c (t)},
m at time slot t with the vector dm (t) = {dm
m
m
l
e
c (t) are binary
where the components dm (t), dm (t), and dm
variables indicating the location where the task is executed.
l (t) = 1 indicates local execution, d e (t) = 1 indicates
Here, dm
m
c (t) = 1 indicates
execution on the edge server, and dm
execution on the cloud server. Since tasks are indivisible, only
one computing model can be selected at each time slot, thereby
imposing the constraint
l
e
c
(t) + dm
(t) + dm
(t) = 1.
dm

(2)

The set of total devices offloading decisions at time slot t
is represented by D(t) = {d1 (t), d2 (t), . . . , dM (t)}. Next, we
discuss these three computing models in sequence.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Queen's University. Downloaded on October 19,2025 at 01:37:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

SHANG et al.: JOINT COMPUTATION OFFLOADING AND SERVICE CACHING IN MOBILE EDGE–CLOUD COMPUTING

1) Local Computing: If the mobile device m processes the
requested task locally at time slot t, the overall time consumed
is only that of executing the task, which is computed by
ϕm (t)
Tml (t) =
flocal

l
(t) = κ(flocal )2 ϕm (t)
Em

(4)

where κ is the energy consumption coefficient, influenced by
the chip architecture of the mobile device.
2) Edge Computing: If the mobile device m offloads
the task to the MEC server, the entire process involves
three phases: 1) the transmission of task data to the MEC
server; 2) the execution of the task at the MEC server; and
3) the reception of the computed results by the device. For
the communication protocol, the system employs orthogonal
frequency-division multiple access, which effectively avoids
interference among mobile devices. We assume the wireless
channel gains are constant within a given time slot but may
vary across different time slots. The uplink and downlink
channel power gains of the mobile device m at time slot t
are represented as hum (t) and hdm (t), correspondingly. Based on
the Shannon–Hartley theorem [27], the maximum uplink and
downlink transfer rates for the mobile device m at time slot t
are calculated as


ptr hum (t)
(5)
Rum (t) = W log2 1 +
σ2
and



pbs hdm (t)
Rdm (t) = W log2 1 +
σ2

ϕm (t)
im (t)
om (t)
+
+ d
M
u
e
Rm (t) fedge / m=1 dm (t) Rm (t)

e
(t) = ptr
Em

im (t)
ϕm (t)
om (t)
+ pid
+ pre d . (8)
M
e
Rum (t)
R
fedge / m=1 dm (t)
m (t)

3) Cloud Computing: If the mobile device m offloads the
request task to the cloud server, it first transfers the requested
task input data to the base station via wireless network. The
data then is forwarded to the remote cloud server via the core
network, assuming a transmission rate of Rc . Given the robust
computational capabilities of cloud servers, the computing
time is often negligible, shifting emphasis toward the latency
involved in data transmission. Consequently, the overall time
required of the cloud computing process is formulated as
Tmc (t) =

im (t) + om (t)
im (t)
om (t)
+
+ d .
Rum (t)
Rc
Rm (t)

c
Em
(t) = ptr

im (t)
im (t) + om (t)
om (t)
+ pid
+ pre d .
Rum (t)
Rc
Rm (t)

(10)

Analyzing further, the aggregate time and energy consumed to
perform the task of the mobile device m can be expressed as
l
e
c
Tm (t) = dm
(t)Tml (t) + dm
(t)Tme (t) + dm
(t)Tmc (t)

(11)

l
l
e
e
c
c
(t)Em
(t) + dm
(t)Em
(t) + dm
(t)Em
(t)
Em (t) = dm

(12)

and

respectively. Combining the above equations, we define the
cost of executing a task requested by mobile device m as the
weighted sum of the consumed time and energy, which is given
by
(13)

where λt and λe represent the weight coefficients for time and
energy, respectively, constrained such that λt + λe = 1, with
each coefficient ranging from 0 to 1.
D. Problem Formulation
In this article, we are dedicated to jointly optimizing service
caching C(t) and computation offloading D(t) in order to
minimize the system cost, defined as the weighted sum of the
time and energy consumed to execute all tasks in the system.
We define the formulated problem as

(7)

where fedge denotes the computing capacity of the MEC server.
In calculating the associated energy consumption, the focus is
placed on the power consumption by mobile devices, excluding the energy consumption within the edge environment.
This stems from the fact that base stations and servers are
consistently connected to a stable power supply, while mobile
devices are energy-constrained due to their compact size.
The mobile device stays idle while waiting for computation.
Assume that the power of the mobile devices in their idle state
is pid , and during the reception of results, it is pre . Therefore,

(9)

Similar to edge computing, the corresponding energy consumption of cloud computing can be calculated as

Zm (t) = λt Tm (t) + λe Em (t)
(6)

respectively, where W represents the channel bandwidth, ptr is
the transmission power of the mobile devices, σ 2 is additive
white Gaussian noise (AWGN) power and pbs is the transmission power of the base station. Similar to [23], we assume that
the MEC server, leveraging virtualization technology, is able to
divide its total computing resources equally and allocate them
to the offloaded mobile devices [13]. Thus, the total processing
time for the task at the edge can be calculated as
Tme (t) =

the overall energy consumption of the edge computing is given
by

(3)

where flocal is the computing capacity of the mobile devices,
measured in CPU cycles per second. Furthermore, the energy
consumption associated with local task execution directly
correlates with the square of the computing frequency, which
can be quantified by

40335

min

{C (t),D (t)}

M


Zm (t),

m=1

s.t.
C1: ck (t) ∈ {0, 1} ∀k ∈ K
K

ci (t)ui ≤ U ∀k ∈ K
C2:
i=1
l
e
c
(t), dm
(t), dm
(t) ∈ {0, 1} ∀m ∈ M
C3: dm
l
e
c
C4: dm (t) + dm (t) + dm
(t) = 1 ∀m ∈ M
e
C5: dm (t) ≤ ck (t) ∀k ∈ K, m ∈ M.
(14)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Queen's University. Downloaded on October 19,2025 at 01:37:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

40336

IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 11, NO. 24, 15 DECEMBER 2024

C1 denotes whether service k is cached; C2 indicates that
the storage occupied by caching services must not exceed the
available storage capacity of the MEC server; C3 specifies
the execution mode of mobile device m either locally, on the
edge, or in the cloud; C4 states that every mobile device
m can only select one mode of task execution; and C5
represents the constraints between task offloading to the MEC
server and its associated caching services. For example, if
the mobile device m requests a task of type τm (t) = k ∈
K, where ck (t) = 1 indicates that the corresponding service
k is cached on the MEC server, the device can choose to
e (t) = 1) or not (d e (t) = 0). Conversely,
offload the task (dm
m
if ck (t) = 0, device m should not offload the task to the
e (t) = 0). The optimization problem described
MEC server (dm
above is dynamic, influenced by time-varying wireless channels and task requests. Specifically, task input and output
data size, along with the quality of the wireless channels,
affect transmission costs. The computational load impacts task
performance costs, necessitating a tradeoff between utilizing
local resources exclusively or sharing computational resources
on the MEC server. The type of task corresponds to different
services, requiring careful consideration of which services to
cache on MEC servers with limited storage. Conventional
optimization methods typically require extensive iterations
to achieve acceptable results, rendering them impractical
for frequently resolve optimization problems in the rapidly
changing edge systems [28]. Therefore, we model the above
optimization problem as an MDP and then introduce the DRLbased approach to address it.

mobile devices; 4) o(t) = {o1 (t), o2 (t), . . . , oM (t)} indicates
the computation result sizes for M mobile devices; and
5) h(t) = {hu1 (t), . . . , huM (t), hd1 (t), . . . , hdM (t)} indicates the
channel states for M mobile devices.
2) Action Space: Define the action space as A. The system
incorporates two categories of actions: 1) task offloading and
2) service caching. At time slot t, the action at ∈ A is
comprised of four binary decision variables, represented as

This section first present MDP formulation. Subsequently,
it introduces the necessary preliminaries of DRL. Finally, the
section details the proposed approach.
A. MDP Formulation
We conceptualize the formulated optimization problem as an
online sequential decision-making problem, employing a MDP
to model the dynamics of each time slots. On the other hand,
DRL is a powerful machine learning approach, is utilized to
solve the MDP by continuously updating its policy through
interaction with the environment. Within this framework, the
base station acts as the agent, gathering observed information
and making decisions at each time slot. The entire MEC
system is regarded as the environment, providing immediate
rewards to the agent after performing the action it decides.
The elements of the MDP model are defined in detail.
1) State Space: Define the state space as S. At the time
slot t, the state st ∈ S, observed by the agent, consists of the
five components, represented as
(15)

where 1) i(t) = {i1 (t), i2 (t), . . . , iM (t)} indicates the sizes
of input data for tasks for M mobile devices; 2) ϕ(t) =
{ϕ1 (t), ϕ2 (t), . . . , ϕM (t)} indicates the number of CPU cycles
required to process the tasks for M mobile devices; 3) τ (t) =
{τ1 (t), τ2 (t), . . . , τM (t)} indicates the types of tasks for M

(16)

where 1) c(t) = {c1 (t), c2 (t), . . . , cK (t)} denotes the caching
decisions for K services, i.e., ck (t) = 1 specifies service k is
l (t)}
cached on the MEC server; 2) dl (t) = {d1l (t), d2l (t), . . . , dM
denotes local computing decisions for M mobile devices, i.e.,
l (t) = 1 specifies mobile device m performs its task locally;
dm
e (t)} denotes edge computing
3) de (t) = {d1e (t), d2e (t), . . . , dM
e (t) = 1 specifies
decisions for M mobile devices, i.e., dm
that the task from mobile device m is offloaded to the MEC
c (t)}
server for processing; and 4) dc (t) = {d1c (t), d2c (t), . . . , dM
denotes cloud computing decisions for M mobile devices, i.e.,
c (t) = 1 specifies that the task from mobile device m is
dm
offloaded to the cloud server for processing.
3) Reward Function: The design of the reward function is
typically aligned with the optimization objective. In our model,
the immediate reward is specified as the inverse of the total
system cost, implying that an increase in reward corresponds
to a decrease in system costs. At time slot t, the immediate
reward r(t) in our system is formulated as
r(t) = −

IV. D EEP R EINFORCEMENT L EARNING A PPROACH

st = {i(t), ϕ(t), τ (t), o(t), h(t)}

at = {c(t), dl (t), de (t), dc (t)}

M


[λt Tm (t) + λe Em (t)].

(17)

m=1

B. Preliminaries
The PPO algorithm [16] is a widely popular cutting-edge
reinforcement learning algorithm due to its stability and
efficiency. It is classified as a member of the policy-based
algorithm family. Unlike value-based reinforcement learning
algorithms that focus on evaluating the optimal value function
to discover the optimal policy, policy-based reinforcement
learning algorithms optimize the parameterized policy directly,
making them particularly suited to problems with highdimensional or continuous action spaces. Specifically, the
policy-based reinforcement learning algorithms first parameterizes the policy to be learned. In DRL, this policy function
is modeled by a DNN that takes the state as input and
then approximates the probability distribution of all actions
based on its powerful function approximation capabilities. The
objective is to determine an optimal policy that maximizes the
expected return in a specified environment. However, although
policy-based reinforcement learning methods are intuitive,
they are prone to instability and difficulty in converging.
These problems mainly arise from the tendency of policy
update steps to be too large, easily leading to significant,
abrupt changes in policy behavior, which could potentially
cause the training process to collapse. To address these
issues, researchers improved many algorithms, one of the most
famous being the trust region policy optimization (TRPO)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Queen's University. Downloaded on October 19,2025 at 01:37:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

SHANG et al.: JOINT COMPUTATION OFFLOADING AND SERVICE CACHING IN MOBILE EDGE–CLOUD COMPUTING

Fig. 2.

40337

Structure of proposed DRL-based approach.

[29] algorithm. The fundamental idea behind it is to introduce
a trust region while updating policies to restrict the size of
updates. This guarantees that the variation between new and
old policies stays within a manageable range, thus decreasing
instability in the learning process. Although the TRPO is
effective in many applications, it requires a highly complex
computational process, with each update step requiring a
significant amount of computation. The PPO algorithm further
improves on it by restricting the magnitude of the policy
update in the objective function, which significantly improves
the computational efficiency. The PPO algorithm adopts two
variants: 1) PPO-penalty and 2) PPO-clip. In this article, we
adopted the latter because it simplifies the implementation
of the algorithm and improves the computational efficiency
compared to the former.
Before embarking on a more detailed examination, it is
essential to introduce some important basic functions. First,
the state value function Vπ (s) quantifies the expected return
from a given state s under a policy π , expressed as

∞

k
γ Rt+k |St = s .
(18)
Vπ (s) = Eπ
k=0

The action value function Qπ (s, a) quantifies the expected
rewards for choosing a certain action a in a given state s
according policy π , depicted as

∞

k
γ Rt+k |St = s, At = a .
(19)
Qπ (s, a) = Eπ
k=0

The advantage function, on the other hand, estimates the
relative benefit of action a in the state s over the average
performance of all potential actions, represented as
Aπ (s, a) = Qπ (s, a) − Vπ (s).

(20)

Finally, the temporal difference (TD) residual is frequently
utilized to calculate the advantage function, assessing the

actual versus the expected rewards of a chosen action under
the current policy, formulated as
δt = rt + γ V(st+1 ) − V(st ).

(21)

C. Proposed Approach
The proposed approach is constructed on the PPO algorithm,
implemented within the actor-critic framework, as delineated
in Fig. 2. The actor network employs a fully connected neural
network with two hidden layers as an approximator for the
policy function, which takes the state as input and outputs
the probability distribution of actions. Deep learning provides
a more flexible and powerful function approximation method
through its multilayer structure and nonlinear transformations,
enabling the actor network to learn the optimal mapping
through iterative parameter updates. Similarly, the critic
network employs DNNs to approximate the value function,
thereby guiding the update direction of the actor network. Due
to the simultaneous decision-making on computation offloading and service caching, integrating these into a unified action
space would result in an extremely large number of possible
action combinations. To address this, we adopt the action
composition [30] to reorganize the action space, considering
the entire action space as a composition of multiple subaction
components. We define dm (t) ∈ {0, 1, 2} as the offloading
decision for mobile devices m at time slot t. Specifically,
dm (t) = 0 denotes local computing, dm (t) = 1 denotes edge
computing, and dm (t) = 2 denotes cloud computing. Each
service caching decision and mobile device offloading decision
is treated as a subaction that follows a categorical distribution,
which significantly reduces the training burden on the neural
network and enhances the scalability of the system.
Moreover, service caching and task offloading are intrinsically linked within the MEC system. If the required service
for the task is not cached on the MEC server, offloading the
task to the edge for execution is ineffective. In the field of

Authorized licensed use limited to: Queen's University. Downloaded on October 19,2025 at 01:37:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

40338

IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 11, NO. 24, 15 DECEMBER 2024

reinforcement learning, applying a large negative value to the
reward function is a common way to restrict invalid actions.
However, this method does not completely prevent invalid
actions and can lead to difficulties in finding the first reward,
especially in the early stages of exploration with a large action
space. Therefore, we design a dynamic masking mechanism to
mask invalid actions instead of imposing penalty. Specially, we
use zi (t) to denote the original logit value corresponding to the
action i. To distinguish between valid and invalid actions, we
introduce a binary mask variable mi (t), where values of 1 and
0 indicate the validity and invalidity of action i, respectively,
and this is generated based on the task information requested
by the device and service decisions. Next, by applying the
masking mechanism, we obtain masked logits zi (t), formulated
as

Algorithm 1 Proposed DRL-Based Approach
1: Initialize: the weights and biases of πθ (at |st ) and Vφ (st ),
the memory buffer D;
2: # Collect experiences with policy πθold (at |st )
3: for iteration = 1 to L do
4:
for time slot t = 0, 1, ..., N do
5:
Observer current state st
6:
Implement the policy πθold (at |st ) in MEC environment to obtain collective system decisions.
7:
Execute the joint action at to obtain the immediate
reward of the system rt according Eq. (17)
8:
Observe the next state st+1
9:
Record (st , at , rt , st+1 ) into memory buffer D
10:
end for
11:
# Optimize the neural networks
12:
for epoch = 1 to K do
13:
Shuffle training data and form mini-batches for gradient updates
14:
Compute GAE Â according Eq. (24)
15:
Adam optimizer updates the parameters of the actor
network by maximize Eq. (26)
16:
Adam optimizer updates the parameters of the critic
network by minimize Eq. (27)
17:
end for
18:
Update θold ← θ and φold ← φ
19:
Clear the memory buffer D
20: end for

zi (t) = zi (t) + (1 − mi (t)) × C

(22)

where C is an extremely large negative number, ensuring that
the probability of an invalid action after Softmax processing
is near zero. This processing allows invalid actions to be
effectively masked in subsequent category distributions, thus
allowing the system to randomly sample within the correct
set of actions, which greatly enhances the learning process’s
efficiency and performance.
1) Actor Network: We adopt the probability ratio rt (θ ) to
quantify the variations before and after the strategy updates
under the identical state and action, which is characterized by
rt (θ ) =

πθ (at |st )
.
πθold (at |st )

(23)

In addition, to augment the calculation of the advantage function in terms of flexibility, stability, and efficiency, generalized
advantage estimation (GAE) is integrated into the network. It
introduces the weighting parameter λ ∈ [0, 1] with the goal
of calculating the advantage function more smoothly, which is
calculated as
Ât = δt + (γ λ)δt+1 + · · · + (γ λ)T−t+1 δT−1 .

(24)

To prevent training collapsing due to excessive updates in the
policy, PPO employs a clipping function to ensure the updates
are within a reasonable range, which is expressed as
⎧
⎨ 1 − , if rt (θ ) ≤ 1 −
clip(rt (θ ), 1 − , 1 + ) = 1 + , if rt (θ ) ≥ 1 + (25)
⎩
rt (θ ), otherwise.
Thus, the objective of the actor network can be written as


LCLIP (θ) = Êt min rt (θ)Ât , clip(rt (θ), 1 − , 1 + )Ât + βH (26)

where the β is the weight of entropy and H is the policy
entropy that encourages exploration under the current policy.
2) Critic Network: The critic network evaluates expected
rewards at a certain state, taking state st as input and outputting
the associated value function V(st ). It updates itself by reducing the difference between the predicted value function and
the computed target values. Thus, the objective of the critic
network is depicted as


target 2
VF
(27)
L (φ) = Êt Vφ (st ) − Vt

target

where Vt
is the target value adopting GAE, calculated as a
combination of discounted rewards and advantages estimated
from state st .
Algorithm 1 summarizes the proposed DRL-based
approach. We begin by initializing the critic and actor
networks with orthogonal weights and constant biases, along
with the memory buffer D. Before initiating network training,
it is crucial to accumulate substantial training data. The
actor network, guided by the old policy πθold (at |st ), makes
the joint decisions at . The system executes the assigned
action and provides the immediate reward at present to the
agent. Associated transition (st , at , rt , st+1 ) is recorded in
the memory buffer, and this process is repeatedly executed
(lines 4–10). For training the networks, we shuffle the data
in the memory buffer and then divide it into multiple minibatches for network updates. We calculate the GAE Â using
the value estimate V(st ) from the critic network, based on
(21) and (24). The parameters of actor and critic networks are
updated by Adam optimizer. The optimization process involves
maximizing the objective function for the actor network and
minimizing it for the critic network (lines 12–17). At the
end of update, we transfer the updated parameters to the old
policy and clear out the memory buffer (lines 18 and 19).
The updated actor network then engages with the environment
to gather new data, and multiple updates are performed to
achieve the optimal policy.
The proposed DRL-based approach can be segmented into
training and inference stages. In the training stage, both the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Queen's University. Downloaded on October 19,2025 at 01:37:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

SHANG et al.: JOINT COMPUTATION OFFLOADING AND SERVICE CACHING IN MOBILE EDGE–CLOUD COMPUTING

actor and critic networks are optimized concurrently, which
can be carried out on the resource-rich cloud infrastructure.
Consequently, similar to [23], we focus on the complexity
of online inference decision-making, where the trained actor
network is deployed at the MEC server. Specifically, the actor
network is constructed as a fully connected neural network
with two hidden layers, where the first hidden layer contains
L1 neurons and the second hidden layer contains L2 neurons.
According to the formulated MDP, it can be deduced that the
input and output dimensions of the actor network are 6M and
3M + 2K, respectively. Thus, the complexity of the neural
network is O(6ML1 + L1 L2 + (3M + 2K)L2 ). Furthermore,
the complexity of generating dynamic masks for mobile
devices and applying these masks are O(MK) and O(M),
respectively. Hence, the total complexity of the inference stage
is O(6ML1 + L1 L2 + (3M + 2K)L2 + MK + M).
V. S IMULATION R ESULTS
An overview of the simulation environment setup is first
present. Subsequent to that, we delve into the convergence
behavior of our method. Finally, the superiority of the
proposed approach is validated by contrasting it with benchmark methods in various environmental scenarios.
A. Experimental Setup
In the simulation experiment, it is assumed that various
mobile devices are dispersed randomly around a base station
within a 100-m radius. The types of services requested follow
the Zipf distribution [37]. For instance, the probability of a
mobile device requesting a task of service k can be represented
as
1/kα
(28)
qk = K
α
k=1 1/k
where α denotes the skewness of popularity and is set to
0.8 [23], [38] in the experiment. The storage space for the
service program is 50 Mb, and the storage space for the edge
server is 100 Mb [21]. In line with [39], we define the average
channel gain according to the free-space path loss equation
E

3 · 108
h̄m = A
(29)
4π fc dm
where fc denotes the operating frequency of the signal, dm is
the separation from the mobile device m to the base station,
E signifies the exponent indicating loss over the path, and A
is antenna gain. We adopt A = 4.11, fc = 915 MHz, and
E = 3. The time-varying fading channel comply with an i.i.d.
Rician distribution, where line of sight link power is 0.6h̄ [40].
Furthermore, the downlink and uplink wireless channels are
considered to be correlated, with the correlation coefficient
set to 0.7 [40]. The communication rate between the MEC
server and the remote cloud servers is 20 Mb/s [41]. Besides,
we set the time and energy weight coefficients λt = λe = 0.5,
indicating their equal importance in our assessments. The
values of λt and λe can be adjusted according to different
requirements. For instance, when λt > λt , the optimization
problem is more focused on reducing the system latency, and

40339

TABLE II
E XPERIMENTAL PARAMETER C ONFIGURATION

vice versa. The other parameter settings in the experimental
simulation are summarized in Table II. Note that the default
parameters are mentioned above unless explicitly stated in
each figure.
In the configuration of the proposed DRL-based approach,
the actor and critic networks are designed with a four-layer
architecture, consisting of two middle hidden layers each
consisting of 256 neurons. We set the learning rates for both
the actor and critic networks at 10−4 , the clipping coefficient
= 0.1, the discount factor γ = 0.9, and the advantage
discount factor λ = 0.95. The Tanh activation function
is adopted across the networks, and the Adam optimizer
is employed for parameter updates. Our experiment utilizes
Pytorch and is executed on a workstation configured with an
NVIDIA RTX 4060Ti GPU. For assessing the performance of
our approach, we chose the following schemes as baselines
for comparison.
1) Local Computing: All tasks are executed on local mobile
devices.
2) Cloud Computing: All tasks are transferred to the cloud
server for execution through the base station.
3) PPO-Based Caching and Offloading: Adopting the same
architecture and settings as the proposed approach, with
the only difference being the removal of the action
mask. When the agent outputs the invalid actions, a large
penalty term is added to the reward function.
4) DDPG-Based Caching and Offloading: Similar
to [21] and [24], the DDPG algorithm is employed for
service caching and task offloading decisions.
5) Most Popular (MP) Caching and Offloading: The MEC
server caches the MP requested services until reaching
its capacity limits. When the required service is stored
on the edge server, the task is transferred there for
processing; otherwise, it is executed locally.
6) Least Recently Used (LRU) Caching and Offloading:
The MEC server caches services based on LRU policy
[42], which means it caches the services of the most
recently requested tasks. When relevant services are
cached on the server, tasks are offloaded.
7) Random Caching and Offloading: The MEC server
randomly caches as many services as possible and makes
random offload decisions based on the cache state.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Queen's University. Downloaded on October 19,2025 at 01:37:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

40340

IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 11, NO. 24, 15 DECEMBER 2024

Fig. 3. Convergence performance for the proposed approach across various
learning rates.

Fig. 5. Convergence performance for the proposed approach versus baseline
schemes.

Fig. 4. Convergence performance for the proposed approach versus PPObased caching and offloading schemes under different settings.

B. Convergence Evaluation
As depicted in Fig. 3, we assess the effectiveness of convergence for the proposed approach across various learning rates.
It can be identified that when the learning rate is specified as
0.01, the agent is unable to learn an effective strategy, resulting
in the lowest total reward. Conversely, at a minimal learning
rate of 0.00001, the agent requires a long time to converge to a
satisfying value. Optimal results are observed at a learning rate
of 0.0001, where the total reward rapidly increases within 500
episodes and then stabilizes with minor fluctuations, ultimately
achieving the highest total reward. Based on these findings, we
select a learning rate of 0.0001 for subsequent experiments.
In Fig. 4, we compare the performance of the proposed
approach, which employs dynamic masking, with the PPObased caching and offloading scheme that constrains invalid
actions by imposing penalty terms set to 30, 50, and 100,
respectively. As can be observed from the figure, under the
three different penalty value settings, there is no significant
difference in the final converged total rewards, all stabilizing
around −1500. When the penalty term value is set to 100, the
fluctuation range of the cumulative reward after convergence
is relatively large. Moreover, in terms of convergence rate,

the convergence speeds of the three PPO-based caching and
offloading schemes are slower than the proposed approach,
requiring about 500 episodes to stabilize within a certain
range. Additionally, the total rewards of the three schemes after
convergence are lower than those of the proposed approach.
In the following experiments, we set the penalty term value
of the PPO-based caching and offloading scheme to 50.
In Fig. 5, we compare the convergence of the proposed
approach with two DRL-based baseline schemes. From the
figure, it can be observed that the proposed method converges
the fastest, reaching convergence after approximately 250
episodes; the PPO-based caching and offloading scheme
follows, converging after about 500 episodes; while the
DDPG-based caching and offloading scheme requires about
750 episodes to achieve convergence. Furthermore, it is evident
that the proposed approach achieves higher rewards after
convergence compared to the other two baseline schemes.
The proposed approach avoids the agent identifying ineffective
actions through trial and error, thereby enhancing the learning
efficiency. Moreover, excessive penalties may cause the agent
to become overly cautious, restricting its capacity to find more
optimal strategies. Next, we further validate the performance
of the proposed approach and baseline schemes under additional scenarios.
C. Performance Evaluation
Fig. 6 depicts the comparison of the average cost per device
of the proposed approach and the baseline schemes under
different task data sizes. We adjust the range of input and
output data sizes by applying a scaling factor that ranges from
0.7 to 1.2. It is evident from the figure that as the scale
factor increases, the average cost for all methods generally
increase. This is due to the increased task size resulting in
longer transmission delays, and subsequently raising system
cost. Among these, the impact on the cloud computing scheme
is particularly pronounced. This is because the cost of cloud
computing ignores the consumption of computation and is
dominated by the consumption of transmission. Furthermore,
the figure indicates that our proposed approach is consistently
lower in average cost than the other six baseline schemes.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Queen's University. Downloaded on October 19,2025 at 01:37:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

SHANG et al.: JOINT COMPUTATION OFFLOADING AND SERVICE CACHING IN MOBILE EDGE–CLOUD COMPUTING

Fig. 6.

Average cost versus different task sizes.

Fig. 8.

Average cost versus different channel bandwidths.

Fig. 7.

Average cost versus different CPU cycles.

Fig. 9.

Average cost versus different MEC computing capacities.

Fig. 7 shows the impact of various computational workloads
on the performance of the proposed approach and baseline
schemes. Similar to task size scaling, we adjust the number of
required CPU cycles by multiplying a scaling factor ranging
from 0.7 to 1.2. The figure shows that as the computation load
increases, the average cost per device for all methods also
increases. The proposed approach consistently achieves the
lowest average system costs and effectively adapts to dynamic
changes. Specifically, in comparison to the PPO-based caching
and offloading, DDPG-based caching and offloading, MP
caching and offloading, and LRU caching and offloading
schemes, the proposed approach reduces the system costs by
8.1%, 11.4%, 14.8%, and 19.7% on average, respectively.
Then, Fig. 8 displays the variation in the average cost
per device as the wireless channel bandwidth expands from
1 to 6 MHz. As the increase in the channel bandwidth, the
time required for uploading and downloading tasks decreases,
thereby driving down the overall system costs. Thus, all
the methods in the figure follow a declining trend, with
the proposed approach outperforming the other schemes.
For instance, as the channel bandwidth widens from 2 to
4 MHz, the average cost for the proposed approach decreases

40341

from 2.13 to 1.66, the PPO-based caching and offloading
scheme from 2.32 to 1.87, the DDPG-based caching and
offloading scheme from 2.44 to 1.95, the Random caching
and offloading scheme from 2.91 to 2.80, the MP caching and
offloading scheme from 2.58 to 2.21, the LRU caching and
offloading scheme from 2.69 to 2.45, and the Cloud computing
scheme from 2.93 to 2.08.
Next, we analyze the impact of different MEC server
computing capacities on the performance of various methods,
as depicted in Fig. 9. From the figure, it can be seen that as the
computing capacity of the MEC server increases, the average
cost per device for all methods decreases, which is due to the
reduction in task execution time on the MEC server. Notably,
the average cost reduction for the Random caching and
offloading scheme is negligible, indicating that proper service
caching and offloading decisions are more crucial than merely
reducing task execution time on the MEC server. The proposed
approach demonstrates superior performance under different
MEC server computing capacities. For example, when the
MEC server computing capacity is 12 GHz, the proposed
approach reduces the average cost by 7.1%, 11.6%, 16.8%,
20.9%, and 27.2% compared to the PPO-based caching and

Authorized licensed use limited to: Queen's University. Downloaded on October 19,2025 at 01:37:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

40342

Fig. 10.

IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 11, NO. 24, 15 DECEMBER 2024

Average cost versus different weighted coefficient λt .

offloading, DDPG-based caching and offloading, MP caching
and offloading, LRU caching and offloading, and Random
caching and offloading schemes, respectively.
In Fig. 10, we compare the changes in the average cost
per device under different time weight factors. As previously
defined, our objective is to minimize the weighted sum of time
and energy consumption, with the time weight coefficient λt
and the energy weight coefficient λe represent the optimization
preferences, satisfying λt + λe = 1. When the time weight
coefficient increases, the optimization objective becomes more
sensitive to latency, leading to decisions that may sacrifice
energy to prioritize reducing latency. Notably, as λt increases
from 0.1 to 0.9 (corresponding, λe decreases from 0.9 to 0.1),
the average cost per device for the proposed approach, the
PPO-based caching and offloading and DDPG-based caching
and offloading schemes change from 1.15 to 2.64, 1.24 to
2.85, and 1.31 to 2.89, respectively. These changes are not
substantial and remain within the same order of magnitude.
We can observe from the figure that the proposed approach
can adapt to different optimization requirements and reduce
the average cost more effectively compared to other baseline
schemes.
Fig. 11 presents the influence of increasing the MEC server
storage capacity on the average cost. From the figure, it can
be observed that all methods, including the Random caching
and offloading scheme, exhibit a noticeable reduction in the
average cost as the storage capacity increases. This is because
a larger storage capacity enables the MEC server to store
a wider variety of services, increasing the likelihood that a
requested service is already cached when needed. For example,
when the storage capacity of the MEC server increases from
50 to 200 Mb, the average cost of the proposed approach
decreases from 2.32 to 2.01, achieving a 13.4% reduction in
cost.
In Fig. 12, we compare the performance under various
combinations of mobile devices and service quantities. We
set the number of mobile devices to 3, 5, 7, 9, 11, and 13,
and the number of services to 8, 10, and 13, resulting in
six different combinations. As shown in the figure, except

Fig. 11.

Average cost versus different storage capacity.

Fig. 12.

Average cost versus different the device–service combinations.

for the Random caching and offloading scheme, the average
cost for other methods increases significantly as the number
of mobile devices and services increases. This is because
the tasks requested become more diverse, and more devices
compete for the limited storage and computing resources of
the MEC server. We can observe that the proposed method
consistently demonstrates superiority in different application
scenarios, maintaining the lowest average cost compared to
other methods.
VI. C ONCLUSION
In this work, we explore joint computation offloading
and service caching in a dynamic three-tier network with
time-varying task types, characteristics, and wireless channel
conditions. An optimization problem is formulated to minimize the system cost, defined as the weighted sum of time and
energy consumption. We then model this optimization problem
as a MDP and propose a DRL-based approach with dynamic
masking to solve it effectively. The proposed approach
renormalizes the probability distribution of valid actions in
each time slot, thereby effectively constraining the coupling

Authorized licensed use limited to: Queen's University. Downloaded on October 19,2025 at 01:37:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

SHANG et al.: JOINT COMPUTATION OFFLOADING AND SERVICE CACHING IN MOBILE EDGE–CLOUD COMPUTING

between task offloading and service caching. Simulation experiments demonstrate that our proposed approach can converge
quickly and greatly outperform other baseline schemes. In
the future, we plan to integrate meta-learning with DRL to
further investigate the joint optimization of service caching
and computation offloading across multiple timescales. By
incorporating meta-learning, we intend to enable the learned
DRL policy to quickly adapt to new task environments with
minimal training, thereby enhancing generalization ability.
R EFERENCES
[1] Q. Luo, S. Hu, C. Li, G. Li, and W. Shi, “Resource scheduling in edge
computing: A survey,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 23, no. 4,
pp. 2131–2165, 4th Quart., 2021.
[2] X. Kong, Y. Wu, H. Wang, and F. Xia, “Edge computing for Internet
of Everything: A survey,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 9, no. 23,
pp. 23472–23485, Dec. 2022.
[3] M. Feng, M. Krunz, and W. Zhang, “Joint task partitioning and
user association for latency minimization in mobile edge computing
networks,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 70, no. 8, pp. 8108–8121,
Aug. 2021.
[4] B. Shang, L. Liu, and Z. Tian, “Deep learning-assisted energy-efficient
task offloading in vehicular edge computing systems,” IEEE Trans. Veh.
Technol., vol. 70, no. 9, pp. 9619–9624, Sep. 2021.
[5] V. D. Tuong, T. P. Truong, T.-V. Nguyen, W. Noh, and S. Cho„
“Partial computation offloading in NOMA-assisted mobile-edge computing systems using deep reinforcement learning,” IEEE Internet Things
J., vol. 8, no. 17, pp. 13196–13208, Sep. 2021.
[6] S. Bi, L. Huang, and Y.-J. A. Zhang, “Joint optimization of service caching placement and computation offloading in mobile edge
computing systems,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 19, no. 7,
pp. 4947–4963, Jul. 2020.
[7] W. Chu, X. Jia, Z. Yu, J. C. S. Lui, and Y. Lin, “Joint service caching,
resource allocation and task offloading for MEC-based networks: A
multi-layer optimization approach,” IEEE Trans. Mobile Comput., vol.
23, no. 4, pp. 2958–2975, Apr. 2024.
[8] X. Dai et al., “Task offloading for cloud-assisted fog computing with
dynamic service caching in enterprise management systems,” IEEE
Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 19, no. 1, pp. 662–672, Jan. 2023.
[9] H. Liu, Y. Li, and S. Wang, “Request scheduling combined with load
balancing in mobile-edge computing,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 9,
no. 21, pp. 20841–20852, Nov. 2022.
[10] Z. Xiao et al., “Multi-objective parallel task offloading and content
caching in D2D-aided MEC networks,” IEEE Trans. Mobile Comput.,
vol. 22, no. 11, pp. 6599–6615, Nov. 2023.
[11] W. Fan et al., “Joint task offloading and service caching for multi-access
edge computing in WiFi-cellular heterogeneous networks,” IEEE Trans.
Wireless Commun., vol. 21, no. 11, pp. 9653–9667, Nov. 2022.
[12] H. Zhou, Z. Zhang, D. Li, and Z. Su, “Joint optimization of computing offloading and service caching in edge computing-based smart
grid,” IEEE Trans. Cloud Comput., vol. 11, no. 2, pp. 1122–1132,
Apr.–Jun. 2023.
[13] J. Yan, S. Bi, L. Duan, and Y.-J. A. Zhang, “Pricing-driven service
caching and task offloading in mobile edge computing,” IEEE Trans.
Wireless Commun., vol. 20, no. 7, pp. 4495–4512, Jul. 2021.
[14] Y. Chen et al., “LOCUS: User-perceived delay-aware service placement
and user allocation in MEC environment,” IEEE Trans. Parallel Distrib.
Syst., vol. 33, no. 7, pp. 1581–1592, Jul. 2021.
[15] X. Wang, Y. Han, V. C. Leung, D. Niyato, X. Yan, and X. Chen,
“Convergence of edge computing and deep learning: A comprehensive
survey,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 22, no. 2, pp. 869–904,
2nd Quart., 2020.
[16] J. Schulman, F. Wolski, P. Dhariwal, A. Radford, and O. Klimov,
“Proximal policy optimization algorithms,” 2017, arXiv:1707.06347.
[17] H. Zhou, K. Jiang, X. Liu, X. Li, and V. C. M. Leung, “Deep reinforcement learning for energy-efficient computation offloading in mobile-edge
computing,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 9, no. 2, pp. 1517–1530,
Jan. 2022.
[18] H. Zhou, K. Jiang, S. He, G. Min, and J. Wu, “Distributed deep
multi-agent reinforcement learning for cooperative edge caching in
Internet-of-Vehicles,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 22, no. 12,
pp. 9595–9609, Dec. 2023.

40343

[19] C. Sun, X. Li, C. Wang, Q. He, X. Wang, and V. C. Leung, “Hierarchical
deep reinforcement learning for joint service caching and computation
offloading in mobile edge–cloud computing,” IEEE Trans. Services
Comput., vol. 17, no. 4, pp. 1548–1564, Jul./Aug. 2024.
[20] L. Wang and G. Zhang, “Joint service caching, resource allocation and
computation offloading in three-tier cooperative mobile edge computing
system,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Sci. Eng., vol. 10, no. 6, pp. 3343–3353,
Nov.–Dec. 2023.
[21] Z. Xue, C. Liu, C. Liao, G. Han, and Z. Sheng, “Joint service caching
and computation offloading scheme based on deep reinforcement learning in vehicular edge computing systems,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol.,
vol. 72, no. 5, pp. 6709–6722, May 2023.
[22] H. Zhou, Z. Wang, H. Zheng, S. He, and M. Dong, “Cost
minimization-oriented computation offloading and service caching in
mobile cloud-edge computing: An A3C-based approach,” IEEE Trans.
Netw. Sci. Eng., vol. 10, no. 3, pp. 1326–1338, May/June 2023.
[23] J. Zhang, Y. Shen, Y. Wang, X. Zhang, and J. Wang, “Dual-timescale
resource allocation for collaborative service caching and computation
offloading in IoT systems,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 19, no. 2,
pp. 1735–1746, Feb. 2023.
[24] H. Zhou, Z. Zhang, Y. Wu, M. Dong, and V. C. M. Leung, “Energy
efficient joint computation offloading and service caching for mobile
edge computing: A deep reinforcement learning approach,” IEEE Trans.
Green Commun. Netw., vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 950–961, Jun. 2023.
[25] Y. Wang, J. Niu, G. Chen, X. Zhou, Y. Li, and S. Liu, “RIS-aided
latency-efficient MEC HetNet with wireless backhaul,” IEEE Trans. Veh.
Technol., vol. 73, no. 6, pp. 8705–8719, Jun. 2024.
[26] C. Sun, X. Li, J. Wen, X. Wang, Z. Han, and V. C. M. Leung,
“Federated deep reinforcement learning for recommendation-enabled
edge caching in mobile edge–cloud computing networks,” IEEE J. Sel.
Areas Commun., vol. 41, no. 3, pp. 690–705, Mar. 2023.
[27] C. E. Shannon, “A mathematical theory of communication,” Bell Syst.
Tech. J., vol. 27, no. 3, pp. 379–423, 1948.
[28] S. Bi, L. Huang, H. Wang, and Y.-J. A. Zhang, “Lyapunov-guided
deep reinforcement learning for stable online computation offloading
in mobile-edge computing networks,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun.,
vol. 20, no. 11, pp. 7519–7537, Nov. 2021.
[29] J. Schulman, S. Levine, P. Abbeel, M. Jordan, and P. Moritz, “Trust
region policy optimization,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2015,
pp. 1889–1897.
[30] S. Huang, S. Ontañón, C. Bamford, and L. Grela, “Gym-μrts: Toward
affordable full game real-time strategy games research with deep
reinforcement learning,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Games (CoG), 2021,
pp. 1–8.
[31] Z. Chen, Z. Zhou, and C. Chen, “Code caching-assisted computation
offloading and resource allocation for multi-user mobile edge computing,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manag., vol. 18, no. 4, pp. 4517–4530,
Dec. 2021.
[32] H. Yang, Z. Wei, Z. Feng, X. Chen, Y. Li, and P. Zhang, “Intelligent
computation offloading for MEC-based cooperative vehicle infrastructure system: A deep reinforcement learning approach,” IEEE Trans. Veh.
Technol., vol. 71, no. 7, pp. 7665–7679, Jul. 2022.
[33] X. Yuan, J. Chen, N. Zhang, J. Ni, F. R. Yu, and V. C. Leung,
“Digital twin-driven vehicular task offloading and IRS configuration in
the Internet of Vehicles,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 23,
no. 12, pp. 24290–24304, Dec. 2022.
[34] X. Wang, H. Xing, F. Song, S. Luo, P. Dai, and B. Zhao, “On jointly
Optimizing partial offloading and SFC mapping: A cooperative dualagent deep reinforcement learning approach,” IEEE Trans. Parallel
Distrib. Syst., vol. 34, no. 8, pp. 2479–2497, Aug. 2023.
[35] C. Wan, S. Guo, J. He, G. Liu, and P. Zhou, “iCOS: A deep
reinforcement learning scheme for wireless-charged MEC networks,”
IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 71, no. 7, pp. 7739–7750, Jul. 2022.
[36] W. Hua, P. Liu, and L. Huang, “Energy-efficient resource allocation for
heterogeneous edge–cloud computing,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 11,
no. 2, pp. 2808–2818, Jan. 2024.
[37] K. Shanmugam, N. Golrezaei, A. G. Dimakis, A. F. Molisch, and
G. Caire, “Femtocaching: Wireless content delivery through distributed caching helpers,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 59, no. 12,
pp. 8402–8413, Dec. 2013.
[38] W. Zhang, G. Zhang, and S. Mao, “Deep reinforcement learning based
joint caching and resources allocation for cooperative MEC,” IEEE
Internet Things J., vol. 11, no. 7, pp. 12203–12215, Apr. 2024.
[39] L. Huang, S. Bi, and Y.-J. A. Zhang, “Deep reinforcement learning
for online computation offloading in wireless powered mobile-edge
computing networks,” IEEE Trans. Mobile Comput., vol. 19, no. 11,
pp. 2581–2593, Nov. 2020.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Queen's University. Downloaded on October 19,2025 at 01:37:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

40344

IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 11, NO. 24, 15 DECEMBER 2024

[40] J. Yan, S. Bi, and Y. J. A. Zhang, “Offloading and resource allocation
with general task graph in mobile edge computing: A deep reinforcement
learning approach,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 19, no. 8,
pp. 5404–5419, Aug. 2020.
[41] Y. Hao, M. Chen, H. Gharavi, Y. Zhang, and K. Hwang, “Deep reinforcement learning for edge service placement in softwarized industrial
cyber-physical system,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 17, no. 8,
pp. 5552–5561, Aug. 2021.
[42] Z. Chen, W. Yi, A. S. Alam, and A. Nallanathan, “Dynamic task
software caching-assisted computation offloading for multi-access edge
computing,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 70, no. 10, pp. 6950–6965,
Oct. 2022.

Yan Sun received the B.S. degree from Beijing
Jiaotong University, Beijing, China, in 1992, and
the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees from Beijing University
of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing, in 1996,
and 2007, respectively.
She is a Professor with the School of
Computer Science, Beijing University of Posts
and Telecommunications. She is also a Research
Member with Beijing Key Lab of Intelligent
Telecommunication Software and Multimedia,
Beijing. Her research interests include Internet of
Things, sensor networks, smart environments, and embedded systems.

Ce Shang is currently pursuing the Ph.D.
degree with Beijing University of Posts and
Telecommunications, Beijing, China.
His research interests include mobile edge computing and reinforcement learning.

Youliang Huang is currently pursuing the master’s
degree in computer science with Beijing University
of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing, China.
His research focuses on deep reinforcement learning and artificial intelligence for IT operations.

Mohsen Guizani (Fellow, IEEE) received the B.S.,
M.S., and Ph.D. degrees from Syracuse University,
Syracuse, NY, USA, in 1985, 1987, and 1990,
respectively.
He is the Associate Provost for Faculty Affairs and
Institutional Advancement, Mohamed Bin Zayed
University of Artificial Intelligence, Abu Dhabi,
UAE. Previously, he worked with different institutions: the University of Idaho, Moscow, ID, USA;
Qatar University, Doha, Qatar; Western Michigan
University, Kalamazoo, MI, USA; the University of
West Florida, Pensacola, FL, USA; the University of Missouri-Kansas City,
Kansas City, MO, USA; the University of Colorado-Boulder, Boulder, CO,
USA; and Syracuse University, Syracuse, NY, USA. His research interests
include wireless communications and mobile computing, applied machine
learning, cloud computing, and security and its application to healthcare
systems. He has more than 800 publications in these areas.
Dr. Guizani was listed as a Clarivate Analytics Highly Cited Researcher
in Computer Science in 2019 and 2020, respectively. He has won several
research awards, including the 2015 IEEE Communications Society Best
Survey Paper Award as well as four Best Paper Awards from IEEE ICC and
IEEE GLOBECOM conferences.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Queen's University. Downloaded on October 19,2025 at 01:37:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

